# Introduction
Many people wonder what is the most effective way to reach expert level with Java Technology. The journey from novice to expert may be delayed by frustrating experiences if we are not careful: YouTube videos that takes too long to get to the point, outdated website that goes on irrelevant detours, esoteric hands-on sessions that miss the big picture. We need something better: accurate maps that depict the entire journey of learning, with expert commentary on key areas to avoid pitfalls. Let’s start with the map of Java skill level attainment. 

# Level one
Level one of five is the beginner level, the essential foundation layer that other levels rest upon. People entering this level may be college grads who just completed computer science courses, or experienced professionals who are familiar with a different language, but trying to pick up Java. In either case, achieving this level means 1) full understanding of all Java fundamental keywords and few common design patterns, including singleton, factory, decorator, chain of responsibility. 2) ability to mentally handle the complexity of small programs 3) skill to advance to the next level such as ability to search for answers to new questions, and 4) ability to debug common exceptions or logical issues in the code.

# Level two
Level two requires careful study of design pattern (ie. [Gang of Four](https://www.amazon.com/Design-Patterns-Object-Oriented-Addison-Wesley-Professional-ebook/dp/B000SEIBB8)), review of common idioms of the language (ie. [Effective Java](https://www.amazon.com/Effective-Java-Joshua-Bloch/dp/0134685997)), and multi-threading programming (ie. [Concurrency in Java](https://www.amazon.com/Java-Concurrency-Practice-CONCURRENCY-PRACT-ebook/dp/B004V9OA84)). Professionals at level two can be entrusted to write enterprise level code for a well-defined but limited problem scope independently, with assists from code review by professionals operating at higher proficiency levels. 

# Level three
Level three professionals comfortably work with logic that span across multiple components, using advanced debugging techniques to chase down elusive defects, exhibiting model behavior in terms of caring for code and design decisions on behalf of team, while also creating new design pattern that benefits the organization, and executing on project plan that affects the entire platform. Professionals at this level are also expected to achieve delivery excellence, such as making sure that team is in agreement on a design approach in the early phase of the project.

# Level four
Level four professionals share profound and deep insights during code and design review, driven by in-depth knowledge on critical component/workflow. Professionals at this level often need to combine expertise in multiple fields related to but beyond application development, such as network level troubleshooting and industry domain expertise. At this point, level four professionals are able to provide thought leadership on large code base or profound technical problem that may vex many people in the same industry or problem domain. 

# Level five
Level five professionals are recognized industry-level thought leaders, veteran software connoisseurs with a strong taste for robust software, influencers of technology and product roadmap and proven stress absorbers who design and implement the process or framework that promote team cohesion, conflict resolution and professional growth. Level five professionals have a clear platform or product vision, equipped with admired hands-on capability when leading a team of experts and advising stakeholders.